[docs/rfc] Define RFC merge process (#11416)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector: docs/rfcs/README.md

# Collector RFCs

This folder contains accepted design documents for the Collector. Proposals here imply changes only
on the OpenTelemetry Collector and not on other parts of OpenTelemetry; if you have a cross-cutting
proposal, file an [OTEP][1] instead.

# RFC Process

## Scope

> The RFC process is intended to be used for significant changes to the Collector. Major design

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Request For Comments (RFC) process is intended to be used for significant changes to the Collector. Major design
```

> decisions, specially those that imply a change that is hard to reverse, should probably be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
decisions, specially those that imply a change that is hard to reverse, should generally be
```

documented as an RFC. Controversial changes should also be documented as an RFC, so that the
community can have a chance to provide feedback. The goal of this process is to ensure we have a
coherent vision before embarking on significant work.

Ultimately, if any opentelemetry-collector maintainer feels that a change requires an RFC, then a
merged RFC is a requirement for said change.

## Contents

We are purposefully light on the structure of RFCs, with the focus being the decision process and
not the document itself. When in doubt, the [OTEP template][2] can be a good starting point.
Regardless of the structure, the RFC should make clear what commitments are being made by the
Collector SIG when merging it.

## Announcement

RFCs should be announced in a Collector SIG meeting and on the #otel-collector-dev Slack channel.

> ## Approval process

Reviewer 2: Do we need an amendment process as well? We have made minor tweaks to merged RFC documents in the past.

Reviewer 3: There's a **Modifications to this document** section below that applies to this document and seems suitable, maybe that could apply to RFCs generally as well?

Author: I modified the last section so that it also apples to "modifications to existing RFCs"

An RFC is just like any other PR in this repository, with the exception of more stringent criteria
for merging it.

### Stakeholders

To define merge criteria and voting, each RFC has a set of 'stakeholders'. All
opentelemetry-collector approvers are considered stakeholders. Additional stakeholders (e.g.

> maintainers of related SIGs or experts) may be explicitly noted in the RFC.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
maintainers of related SIGs or code owners of the components) may be explicitly noted in the RFC.
```

Reviewer 5: I think experts is a better standard. This allows code owners but also could be anyone else whose experience and knowledge are very relevant. For example, a RFC pertaining to semantic conventions may need buy in from contributors in a different part of the project.

Reviewer 4: Sounds reasonable to me, and looks like this just lists examples of stakeholders so lgtm as-is

### Merge rules

We use a Lazy Consensus method with the following rules:

1. *Quorum*: For an RFC to be mergeable, it needs to have at least **two approvals** from the
   approvers set as well as approvals from any additional stakeholders.

> 2. *Waiting period*: Maintainers need to announce their intent to merge the RFC with a Github

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. *Waiting period*: Maintainers need to announce their intent to merge the RFC with a GitHub
```

   comment, and wait for at least **4 business days** after making the announcement to merge the

>    RFC.

Reviewer 6: Should we do this by applying a label? Easier for people to filter for this.

Author: Added an `rfc:final-comment-period` label

3. *Objections*: Objections should be communicated as a 'request changes' review. All objections
   must be addressed or voted before merging an RFC. If unable to resolve an objection, any

>    maintainer may call for a vote to be made on the objection (see below). The result is binding.

Reviewer 6: Document that: Maintainers will be able to drop any `request changes` based on the vote results or consensus.

Author: Done!

4. *Modifications*: Non-trivial modifications to an RFC reset the waiting period. RFC authors are

>    encouraged to re-request reviews if the RFC has been modified significantly.

Reviewer 4: I think in this case RFC authors are obligated, rather than encouraged, to re-request reviews. WDYT

Author: Changed "are encouraged to" by "must"

### Voting

If there is no consensus on a particular issue, a vote may be called by any of the maintainers. The
vote will be open to all stakeholders for at least **5 business days** or until at least one third

> of the stakeholders have voted, whichever comes last. The vote will be decided by simple majority,

Reviewer 6: Same, encourage to apply a label "voting-needed" to every PR/issue that needs this.

Author: Added `rfc:vote-needed` label

community can have a chance to provide feedback. The goal of this process is to ensure we have a
coherent vision before embarking on significant work.

Ultimately, if any opentelemetry-collector maintainer feels that a change requires an RFC, then a
merged RFC is a requirement for said change.

## Contents

We are purposefully light on the structure of RFCs, with the focus being the decision process and
not the document itself. When in doubt, the [OTEP template][2] can be a good starting point.
Regardless of the structure, the RFC should make clear what commitments are being made by the
Collector SIG when merging it.

## Announcement

RFCs should be announced in a Collector SIG meeting and on the #otel-collector-dev Slack channel.

## Approval process

An RFC is just like any other PR in this repository, with the exception of more stringent criteria
for merging it.

### Stakeholders

To define merge criteria and voting, each RFC has a set of 'stakeholders'. All
opentelemetry-collector approvers are considered stakeholders. Additional stakeholders (e.g.
maintainers of related SIGs or experts) may be explicitly noted in the RFC.

### Merge rules

> We use a Lazy Consensus method with the following rules:

Reviewer 3: Should we link to a definition of Lazy Consensus? From what I can tell, this term is taken from the Apache Foundation and is defined by them here: https://www.apache.org/foundation/glossary.html#LazyConsensus

It's not difficult to find the definition, and I think our rules stand on their own, but a link could provide some context.

Author: ```suggestion
We use a [Lazy Consensus](https://www.apache.org/foundation/glossary.html#LazyConsensus) method with the following rules:
```

Author: Sounds like a good link to put there, I actually took this [from the TC charter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/5a8dca71fbdaf97a2c36f7ac4002f2b158456cc5/tech-committee-charter.md?plain=1#L96)

1. *Quorum*: For an RFC to be mergeable, it needs to have at least **two approvals** from the
   approvers set as well as approvals from any additional stakeholders.
2. *Waiting period*: Maintainers need to announce their intent to merge the RFC with a GitHub
   comment. They will need to add a `rfc:final-comment-period` label to the PR and wait for at least
   **4 business days** after making the announcement to merge the RFC.
3. *Objections*: Objections should be communicated as a 'request changes' review. All objections

>    must be addressed or voted before merging an RFC. If unable to resolve an objection, any

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   must be addressed before merging an RFC. If addressing an objection does not appear feasible, any
```
I think this makes the distinction between resolving an objection through voting vs. addressing it through other means a little clearer.

   maintainer may call for a vote to be made on the objection (see below). This will be signified by
   adding a `rfc:vote-needed` label to the PR. The voting result is binding and a maintainer can

>    drop any 'request changes' based on the vote results or consensus.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   drop any 'request changes' reviews based on the vote results or consensus.
```

4. *Modifications*: Non-trivial modifications to an RFC reset the waiting period. RFC authors must

>    re-request reviews if the RFC has been modified significantly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   re-request any approving, comment, or 'request changes' reviews if the RFC has been modified significantly.
```
My understanding is that we don't want to have approving reviews applied to an outdated version of the RFC, so I think we should be explicit on that here. For the sake of completeness, we can probably just enumerate the other types of reviews GitHub supports re-requesting a review on as well.

Author: Makes sense, added!
